# PPMS_data_analysis
Python code for loading, analyzing, and saving data generated by a QuantumDesign PPMS instrument.
Written by Evan Telford (ejt2133@columbia.edu) and Christie Koay (csk2172@columbia.edu).

# Running the program:
You will need to install a series of Python packages and a compiler (Spyder) to run the code.
1.	Install Python. 
	- Mac: https://www.python.org/downloads/macos/
	- Windows: https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/

2.	Install Anaconda (a Python environment manager which makes installing software more easily).
	- Mac: https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/mac-os/
	- Windows: https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/windows/#

3.	Create your own environment to install the relevant packages. 
	- Open the Python terminal. On Mac, this is simply opening the terminal. On Windows, this is opening the “Anaconda Prompt”.
	- Type: “conda create --name <insert desired environment name>”. 
	- This creates a new environment with your desired name. The name is arbitrary. 
	- Type: “conda activate <name of your environment>”. This activates your environment. The name should be the same as the one you used in step 3.2.
	- Any lines of code run after this will be run in your chosen environment. 
	- If you want to deactivate the environment and return to the default environment (called “root”), simply type “conda deactivate”. 

	For more details on creating environments: (https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html)

4.	Install Spyder. Spyder is an integrated development environment (IDE) program where you can write, compile, and run python code. 
	- Type: “conda install spyder”. 
	- Check your installation by running Spyder. Do this by typing “Spyder” into the terminal. It should open Spyder.
  
5.	Install a series of additional Python packages required to run the software.
	- Pandas (https://anaconda.org/anaconda/pandas).
	- Numpy (https://anaconda.org/anaconda/numpy).
	- Scipy (https://anaconda.org/anaconda/scipy).
	- Matplotlib (https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/matplotlib).
	- Pyqt5 (https://anaconda.org/anaconda/pyqt)
  
6.	Load the python script that launches the data analysis GUI.
	- Run Spyder by typing “spyder” in the terminal within your desired environment. 
	- Download the program "PPMS_data_analysis.py".
	- Within Spyder, open the data analysis program named “PPMS_data_analysis.py”. 
	- Click the run button (shaped like a “play” button). The GUI should automatically launch.

Note: if you run into issues with installing any of the above packages, try updating anaconda. 
- In the “root” environment, type “conda update conda”.
- Type “conda update --all”.
- Activate your environment.
- Type “conda update --all”.
- Try reinstalling the package.

# List of GUI functions:
	
1.	Load PPMS Data: 
	- Load Data: Opens Finder to select data file.

2.	Available data:
	- x-axis and y-axis: Drop down menus containing titles of all the data columns. You can select which data you want to plot on the x and y axes.

3.	Plot or Print Data:
	- Print Data: This will display the data that you have selected in the drop down menu under x-axis and y-axis in “Available Data” in the Spyder console.
	- Plot Data: Plots selected data from “Available Data” on graph.

4.	Clear Graph: 
	- Clear: Clears ALL traces from the plot.

5.	Create New Data Columns: 

	This tool enables you to do calculations/conversions with data from the existing data columns. 
	- Use the drop down menus “Variable (x)” and “Variable 2 (y)” to select x and/or y variable(s). 
	- You can then define an equation for your calculation in “Analysis Code” using Python syntax and define a new name for the new data column under “New Variable Name.” 
	- Hitting “Create Column” will create a new data column that reflects your calculation. 
	- This new column should be visible in the x-axis and y-axis drop down menus under “Available Data”.

	Note: To call pandas, numpy, or scipy packages use “pan”, “np”, or “sc”, respectively.

6.	Fitting Plot Data:
	- Lower Limit / Upper Limit: Define the x-axes bounds that you want to fit. If you leave these blank, it will default to the min/max of your x-axis data for the lower/upper limit, respectively.
	- Polynomial Fit Order: The polynomial order you want to fit your data to. If you leave this blank, it will default to 1.
	- Fit Data: Replots the data onto the graph and plots the fit as a dashed line. Coefficients for the polynomial fit are displayed in the legend.

7.	Modify Data:
	- Smooth Data Binning Window: Applies a Savitzky-Golay filter to your data. This smooths data by fitting a polynomial to small subsets of data points, which can help with noisy data sets. However, you will lose some resolution. 
	- Binning window: The number of points in each subset over which you want to fit. This must be an odd number greater than 1.
	- Smooth Data: This will apply the filter. Checking the “Save?” box will save the smoothed data as a new data column.
	
8.	Hall Analysis: 
	- Symmetrize: typically used for magnetoresistance data where y = magnetoresistance and x = magnetic field. It performs the following calculation:
		- y_symm  =  (f(+x) + f(-x))/2 		
	- Anti-symmetrize: typically used for Hall measurements where y = Hall resistance and x = magnetic field. It performs the following calculation:
		- y_antisymm  =  (f(+x) - f(-x))/2

9.	Save Data:
	- Save Data: Opens a file dialog to save the modified dataset (including newly generated columns) as a text file (.txt) with the user defined name.
	
	Note: To save the plot as an image file, use the save button on the toolbar above the graph.

10.	Additional functions:
	- Making plots with multiple traces or creating new plots: The folder icon adds traces to the same plot, or creates a new plot.
	- Rename Tabs: Double clicking the tab title will open a new window that will allow you to enter a new name for the tab.

# Data-file constraints:
	
A brief description of the subfunction which loads the data is as follows:
1.	Opens the selected file.
2.	Searches the file for a “[Data]” keyword.
3.	Reads the file start from the line after the one containing “[Data]”. Reading is done assuming comma-delimited text.
4.	The first line after the one containing “[Data]” is set to be the header.
5.	The remaining lines are saved as a data frame.

The python program can therefore load any data file that is formatted in the following way:
- Line X: [Data]
- Line X+1: Comma-delimited names of data columns.
- Line X+2 → end of file: Comma-delimited data in string format.

Note: Any lines before Line X do not matter. Can contain any information in any format. The python code will automatically skip them.
	
Second Note: files generated by MultiVu are saved in the appropriate format. If your file is in a different format, you’ll need to convert it using a third-party program.
